emotions have a stigma in science; they are believed to be inherently non-scientific. scientific principles are derived from rational thought, logical arguments, testable hypotheses, and repeatable experiments. there is room alongside science for non-interfering emotions such as those involved in curiosity, frustration, and the pleasure of discovery. in fact, much scientific research has been prompted by fear. nonetheless, the role of emotions is marginalized at best. why bring emotion or affect into any of the deliberate tools of science? moreover, shouldn't it be completely avoided when considering properties to design into computers? after all, computers control significant parts of our lives   the phone system, the stock market, nuclear power plants, jet landings, and more. who wants a computer to be able to feel angry at them? to feel contempt for any living thing? in this essay i will submit for discussion a set of ideas on what i call affective computing, computing that relates to, arises from, or influences emotions. this will need some further clarification which i shall attempt below. i should say up front that i am not proposing the pursuit of computerized cingulotomies or even into the business of building emotional computers. nor will i propose answers to the difficult and intriguing questions, what are emotions? what causes them? and why do we have them? instead, by a variety of short scenarios, i will define important issues in affective computing. i will suggest models for affect recognition, and present my ideas for new applications of affective computing to computer assisted learning, perceptual information retrieval, arts and entertainment, and human health and interaction. i also describe how advances in affective computing, especially combined with wearable computers, can help advance emotion and cognition theory. first, let us begin with a brief scenario. computers are beginning to acquire the ability to express and recognize affect, and may soon be given the ability to have emotions. the essential role of emotion in both human cognition and perception, as demonstrated by recent neurological studies, indicates that affective computers should not only provide better performance in assisting humans, but also might enhance computers' abilities to make decisions.